do we need a good reputation to be happy
the black mirror episode nose dive takes
place in a futuristic world
in which reputation is the main currency
the story revolves
around a young woman named lacey who
desperately wants to raise her social
credibility so
she can apply for a residence in a fancy
community
this credibility is based on how other
people rate you
on social media and in real life and is
measured on a scale of one to five
your rating decides what kind of
lifestyle you can apply for
when you're a high four for example you
belong to the social elite
and will get access to the best housing
the best transport
the most prestigious social circle and
higher mating opportunities
but when you're a 3 or lower you're seen
as outcast
and many societal doors are close to you
companies won't hire you
people don't want to hang out with you
and you're deemed to live
in a low class neighborhood the story of
nosedive
shows us how much we value our
reputation
and how far we're willing to go to
establish and
maintain it it also shows how fragile
our reputation
actually is and for the most part out of
our control
and that it takes tremendous work to
achieve and maintain
but what if we don't care about our
reputation
what if we become outcasts that are
ignored rejected
and even hated does that mean that we're
doomed to misery
not at all this video explores the
reasons
why based on a black mirror episode nose
dive
and ancient philosophy warning this
video contains
spoilers
[Music]
most people want to be liked because
when we're liked
the access we have to all kinds of
worldly pleasures
increases when we belong to a social
group
with popular great looking people we're
more likely to find a mate
of the same caliber and having a likable
mate increases our
overall likability by association the
problem is however
that the more we try to be liked the
less genuine
we'll be in this black mirror episode we
clearly see
how everyone takes on a persona that's
as fake
as it can get if you say or do something
socially unacceptable you run the risk
of getting voted down
however if you try too hard people will
notice
and vote you down as well this means
that you need to make impressions that
are
exactly right in certain situations if
you want to get good ratings
in a reputation-based world people are
enslaved by public opinion
a tyrant that's mostly driven by
subjectivity
emotion personal preference and
selfishness
everyone keeps everyone in check and
when you do or say
something that goes against the grain
chances are that
people will unite against you this
happened to lacey's co-worker
this young man recently got divorced for
an unknown reason the co-workers decided
to side with the ex-wife
and collectively downvoted him until he
couldn't enter the office building
anymore
in contemporary terms he got cancelled
now the story doesn't come up with a
reason why
everyone is sided with the ex-wife but
the context and the way the characters
are portrayed in this scene
suggests that the reason is probably
flimsy and mainly based on opinion and
personal preference
or the preference of someone with high
social credibility was then followed by
a herd of sheep
that desperately want to belong we see
this happen in our world
all the time one mishap followed by a
group of people
designating you as a pariah gets your
reputation destroyed
you're cancelled meaning what you called
your life
is destroyed and there's nothing you can
do about it
you've now joined the league of outcasts
those that don't belong
those that are met with contempt those
who the people at the top
fear to become welcome
to the sewers
so how do we go on from here well
before we go into that let's further
analyze the nature of
reputation many people carry the
assumption
that we need to have a good reputation
to be happy
we absolutely fear to fall out of favor
because
then many doors close in lacey's world
a reputation rate below 4.5 excludes her
from living in a fancy environment that
in turn
could lead to an increased rating thus
she
chases a higher rating in order to get
something that will increase her rating
which
subsequently leads to better options
that in turn
will lead to a higher rating and so
our tragic hero lacey is stuck on a
hamster wheel
hoping to get what she never will as
long as she keeps
chasing it chasing something that's
insatiable and very difficult to obtain
is not a smart way to achieve happiness
the ancient greek philosopher epicurus
observed this more than 2000 years ago
epicurus stated that
the right amount of pleasure leads to
happiness when our basic needs are met
and we abstain from unnecessary desires
we achieve the state of ataraxia which
means inner tranquility
he distinguished natural desires and
vain desires
natural desires can be split up into
necessary and unnecessary desires
things like food shelter and rest
are necessary luxurious food expensive
clothing
and a house in a fancy community are
unnecessary
but not fundamentally bad vein desires
however
are always unnecessary and insatiable as
well as difficult to fulfill
among the vain desires are power wealth
immortality
and a great reputation also known as
fame
stoic philosopher epictetus goes one
step further
saying that reputation is among the
things that we should contempt
and that we must be willing to be hated
and laughed at if
that's the prize to pay for a tranquil
and free mind
i quote you must watch you must labor
you must get the better of certain
appetites
must quit your acquaintance be despised
by your servant
be laughed at by those you meet come off
worse
than others in everything in
magistracies and honors
in courts of judicature when you have
considered all these
things round approach if you please if
by parting with them
you have a mind to purchase equanimity
freedom
and tranquility end quote in buddhism a
bad reputation is considered a part of
life
it's among the eight worldly winds
namely praise and blame
success and failure pleasure and pain
and fame and disrepute
according to the buddha everyone will
experience these wins in their lives
as they're blowing around us
uncontrollably
most people seek fame and praise and
avoid blame and disrepute
but these factors are so fragile that
we're wasting our lives when we
compulsively chase
or run away from them that's why it's
better to transcend the worldly winds
so we're not moved by them this is part
of the path to becoming enlightened
which entails the cessation of suffering
and here's the gist
the constant fakery the endless people
pleasing
the repression of our true nature the
ongoing fear
of being disliked and the pressure of
always needing to please others
now that's suffering and ironically
suffering
is what all these popularity seekers are
fundamentally trying to end
by their pursuit lacie is confronted
with the truth
about her predicament after she
experiences a temporary but
significant drop in her rating due to a
small incident at the airport
as she is on our way to a wedding of a
very popular but
fake friend naomi hoping that this will
boost her rating beyond 4.5
her car breaks down she tries to
hitchhike
but people ignore her because of her low
rating and she's even randomly voted
down by strangers
but then a woman in a truck offers her a
ride
to lacy's horror the woman's rating is a
whopping 1.4
she is a true outcast and her terrible
social credibility
places her among the ranks of the
despised
but this woman doesn't seem unhappy at
all
moreover she seems carefree and
unattached
despite the fact that she is condemned
to the lower realms of society
she has let go of her reputation and
therefore the suffering that comes with
trying to be liked
has disappeared
now back to the sewers it's essential to
realize
that being hated ignored and rejected
doesn't guarantee a life of misery if
anything
it forces us to rethink our relationship
with our reputation
and to find ways to be happy without the
need for other people's validation and
ultimately discovering that we can be
happy as outcasts
this doesn't mean that we should become
evil doers as
this probably won't make us happy either
most evildoers are externally motivated
thus seeking unnecessary or vain
pleasures that keep them in the cycle of
misery as well
the key figure of the christian faith
jesus of nazareth
is an example of someone who was deeply
hated but he was certain about his
values and beliefs
knowing that he was doing the right
thing out of love
for humanity including his enemies
therefore
despite his terrible reputation and even
getting tortured
he kept radiating his love and
compassion for his fellow humans
another example is the buddha on his
journey to enlightenment he was despised
by the ascetics
when he decided that punishing the body
doesn't end his suffering
this didn't stop him from achieving
enlightenment which happened when he
meditated alone under the bodhi tree
as tyler durden famously said in fight
club it's only after you've lost
everything that you're free to do
anything
in other words being hated ignored
and rejected as a consequence of a
shattered reputation
is an opportunity to free ourselves from
the burden of validation seeking
at the end of the day lacey doesn't want
to carry the heavy cross
of maintaining a good reputation on her
shoulders
she probably doesn't even want all these
unnecessary pleasures
like living in a fancy community and
having popular friends
like everyone she simply wants her
emptiness to be filled and her desires
to be tempered
so she can experience contentment
however brainwashed by the societal
narrative
she seeks relief in the wrong places but
when she ends up in prison the lowest
she could possibly go she realizes that
there's nothing left to lose
she is now free to express herself in
ways
she wants with a total disregard of
other people's opinions
this doesn't mean that we should aim for
the worst it means
that when we lose our attachment to fame
and praise
we will not be moved when these things
are taken away from us
and we will not exhaust ourselves by
chasing them
the less we need the easier contentment
is achieved
by reducing our desires to what's
necessary and widely available
people's opinions lose power over us
when we don't need what they have why
should we be moved
when they hate ignore and reject us
thank you for watching
[Music]
my
you